Revamp gradle page (#3225)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/gradle/gradle-configure.md

> [//]: # (title: Configure your existing project)

Reviewer: "Configure a Gradle project (project with Gradle?)" it fits better: this article is not about configuring any existing or new projects, but _Gradle_ projects.

[//]: # (title: Configure your existing project)

To build a Kotlin project with [Gradle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/getting_started.html), 

> you'll need to add the [Kotlin Gradle plugin](#apply-the-plugin) to your build script file `build.gradle(.kts)` 

Author: This is the new intro (the first sentence existed but I added more details to it). Everything ahead is old except the "What's next" section.

> you'll need to add the [Kotlin Gradle plugin](#apply-the-plugin) to your build script file `build.gradle(.kts)` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you need to add the [Kotlin Gradle plugin](#apply-the-plugin) to your build script file `build.gradle(.kts)` 
```

> and [configure dependencies](#configure-dependencies) there. As the prerequisite, you need to make sure that you have a Gradle Wrapper in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and [configure any dependencies](#configure-dependencies). As a prerequisite, you need to make sure that you either, have a Gradle Wrapper in 
```

Author: Well, these dependencies are not *any*, they are some particular dependencies depending on what a user wants.

Author: @sarahhaggarty, you might have missed my answer.

Reviewer 2: OK. What about "your" instead of "any"?

Author: Sounds strange) They are project dependencies.
I changed to "configure the project's dependencies".

> your project or Gradle installed in your system. Consult the [Gradle official documentation](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/getting_started.html#gs:installation) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your project or, Gradle installed on your system. Consult the [Gradle official documentation](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/getting_started.html#gs:installation) 
```

Author: > As a prerequisite, you need to make sure that you either, have a Gradle Wrapper in your project or, Gradle installed on your system. 

Is it correct to put a comma after "either" and "or"?🤔 Could you please help me with some links to grammar rules on this topic? Would like to learn why to put commas this way and in what cases.

Author: I decided to remove this sentence because people, who set up existing projects, already have Gradle. But I would love to understand commas in this sentence anyway:)

Author: @sarahhaggarty?:)

Reviewer 2: I don't have a source to hand on this at the moment but I'll keep looking and get back to you on it separately. This is only for instructions, to emphasise the two possible conditions that need to be met.

for details.

> > To learn more about different parts of a build script,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To learn more about the contents of a build script,
```

To apply the Kotlin Gradle plugin, use the [`plugins` block](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/plugins.html#sec:plugins_block)
from the Gradle plugins DSL:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
// replace `<...>` with the plugin name 
plugins {
    kotlin("<...>") version "%kotlinVersion%"
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
// replace `<...>` with the plugin name
plugins {
    id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.<...>' version '%kotlinVersion%'
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

When configuring your project, check the Kotlin Gradle plugin compatibility with available Gradle versions:

|                       | Minimum supported version | Maximum fully supported version |
|-----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Gradle                | %minGradleVersion%        | %maxGradleVersion%              |   
| Android Gradle plugin | %minAndroidGradleVersion% | %maxAndroidGradleVersion%       |

For example, the Kotlin Gradle plugin and the `kotlin-multiplatform` plugin %kotlinVersion% require the minimum Gradle
version of %minGradleVersion% for your project to compile.

> In turn, the maximum fully supported version is %maxGradleVersion%. It doesn't have deprecated Gradle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, the maximum fully supported version is %maxGradleVersion%. It doesn't have deprecated Gradle
```

> methods and properties and supports all the current Gradle features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
methods and properties, and supports all the current Gradle features.
```

```

Applying Kotlin plugins with `apply` in the Kotlin Gradle DSL is not recommended – [see why](gradle-kotlin-dsl.md#using-the-gradle-kotlin-dsl).

### Kotlin and Java sources

Kotlin sources and Java sources can be stored in the same folder, or they can be placed in different folders. The default convention is to use different folders:

```groovy
project
    - src
        - main (root)
            - kotlin
            - java
```

The corresponding `sourceSets` property should be updated if you are not using the default convention:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
sourceSets.main {
    java.srcDirs("src/main/myJava", "src/main/myKotlin")
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
sourceSets {
    main.kotlin.srcDirs += 'src/main/myKotlin'
    main.java.srcDirs += 'src/main/myJava'
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

### Check for JVM target compatibility of related compile tasks

In the build module, you may have related compile tasks, for example:
* `compileKotlin` and `compileJava`
* `compileTestKotlin` and `compileTestJava`

> `main` and `test` source set compile tasks are not related.
>
{type="note"}

> For such related tasks, the Kotlin Gradle plugin checks for JVM target compatibility. Different values of `jvmTarget` in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For related tasks like these, the Kotlin Gradle plugin checks for JVM target compatibility. Different values of `jvmTarget` in
```

the `kotlin` extension and [`targetCompatibility`](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_plugin.html#sec:java-extension)

> in the `java` extension cause incompatibility. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the `java` extension can cause incompatibility issues. For example:
```

Author: We try to avoid words like issues, problems, etc.

Author: Do you mean there should be some specifying word before "incompatibility"? Because above we write:
> the Kotlin Gradle plugin checks for JVM target compatibility

And then we write that some conditions may cause incompatibility. Incompatibility is quite a widespread word in development. 

In the chapter about [inline functions](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html#restrictions-for-public-api-inline-functions), we write:

> This imposes certain risks of binary incompatibility caused by changes in the module that declares an inline function in
> case the calling module is not re-compiled after the change.
> 
> To eliminate the risk of such incompatibility being introduced by a change in a *non*-public API of a module, public
> API inline functions are not allowed to use non-public-API declarations, i.e. `private` and `internal` declarations and
> their parts, in their bodies.

But there we use "binary" and "such".

Reviewer 2: So "JVM target compatibility" is the same as saying "compatibility of the JVM targets". Similarly with "binary". And "such" is just a shortcut meaning "binary" again. So two different JVM target versions in different parts of the build system can be incompatible. To say "causes incompatibility" we need to add "of something". It might just be easier to say that the JVM targets must be the same 😃

Author: >two different JVM target versions in different parts of the build system 
Not the build system, but the build settings. Gradle is the build system. All other stuff is the means with which we use Gradle. But it doesn't matter.

Let' say 
cause JVM target incompatibility

I suppose it's better to show the example with differences as it's now than say that the targets should be the same.

the `compileKotlin` task has `jvmTarget=1.8`, and
the `compileJava` task has (or [inherits](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_plugin.html#sec:java-extension)) `targetCompatibility=15`.

> Control the behavior of this check by setting the `kotlin.jvm.target.validation.mode` property in the `build.gradle`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure the behavior of this check by setting the `kotlin.jvm.target.validation.mode` property in the `build.gradle`
```

> file equal to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
file to:
```

* `warning` – the default value; the Kotlin Gradle plugin will print a warning message.
* `error` – the plugin will fail the build.
* `ignore` – the plugin will skip the check and won't produce any messages.

### Set custom JDK home

By default, Kotlin compile tasks use the current Gradle JDK.

> If you need to change the JDK by some reason, you can set the JDK home with [Java toolchains](#gradle-java-toolchains-support)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to change the JDK for some reason, you can set the JDK home with [Java toolchains](#gradle-java-toolchains-support)
```

or the [Task DSL](#setting-jdk-version-with-the-task-dsl) to set a local JDK.

> The `jdkHome` compiler option is deprecated since Kotlin 1.5.30.
>
{type="warning"}

When you use a custom JDK, note that [kapt task workers](kapt.md#running-kapt-tasks-in-parallel)
use [process isolation mode](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/worker_api.html#changing_the_isolation_mode) only,
and ignore the `kapt.workers.isolation` property.

### Gradle Java toolchains support

Gradle 6.7 introduced [Java toolchains support](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/toolchains.html).
Using this feature, you can:

> * Use a JDK and a JRE that are different from the Gradle ones to run compilations, tests, and executables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use a JDK and a JRE that are different from the Gradle versions to run compilations, tests, and executables.
```

Author: These "versions" are not the versions of Gradle itself, but Gradle has its own JDK and JRE, and about these versions we're talking about.

Reviewer 2: Ah OK! Updated the suggestion based on your feedback.

Author: Thank you! But there is still such a point: people usually don't have any idea which JDK and JRE Gradle uses because Gradle does it automatically. You don't plug JDK into Gradle, it goes packed with a Gradle version. Why can't we leave the sentence as it was?

Reviewer 2: I suggested the change because "the Gradle ones" isn't correct. A definite article is needed. The closest substitute I can think of is "the ones in Gradle". Maybe this article about "ones" will help explain what I mean: https://langeek.co/en/grammar/course/175/one-and-ones

Author: the Gradle's ones?

I used "the ones in Gradle".

Reviewer 2: Ah yes. This comment snippet is out of date. This looks great!

* Compile and test code with a not-yet-released language version.

With toolchains support, Gradle can autodetect local JDKs and install missing JDKs that Gradle requires for the build.
Now Gradle itself can run on any JDK and still reuse the [remote build cache feature](gradle-compilation-and-caches.md#gradle-build-cache-support)
for tasks that depend on a major JDK version.

The Kotlin Gradle plugin supports Java toolchains for Kotlin/JVM compilation tasks. JS and Native tasks don't use toolchains.
The Kotlin compiler always runs on the JDK the Gradle daemon is running on.
A Java toolchain:
* Sets the [`jdkHome` option](gradle-compiler-options.md#attributes-specific-to-jvm) available for JVM targets.
* Sets the [`kotlinOptions.jvmTarget`](gradle-compiler-options.md#attributes-specific-to-jvm) to the toolchain's JDK version
  if the user doesn't set the `jvmTarget` option explicitly.

>   If the user doesn't configure the toolchain, the `jvmTarget` field will use the default value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If the user doesn't configure the toolchain, the `jvmTarget` field uses the default value.
```

  Learn more about [JVM target compatibility](#check-for-jvm-target-compatibility-of-related-compile-tasks).
* Sets the toolchain to be used by any Java compile, test and javadoc tasks.
* Affects which JDK [`kapt` workers](kapt.md#running-kapt-tasks-in-parallel) are running on.

Use the following code to set a toolchain. Replace the placeholder `<MAJOR_JDK_VERSION>` with the JDK version you would like to use:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
kotlin {
    jvmToolchain {
        languageVersion.set(JavaLanguageVersion.of(<MAJOR_JDK_VERSION>)) // "8" 
    }
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
kotlin {
    jvmToolchain {
        languageVersion.set(JavaLanguageVersion.of(<MAJOR_JDK_VERSION>)) // "8"
    }
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> Note that setting a toolchain via the `kotlin` extension will update the toolchain for Java compile tasks as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that setting a toolchain via the `kotlin` extension updates the toolchain for Java compile tasks as well.
```

```kotlin
val service = project.extensions.getByType<JavaToolchainService>()
val customLauncher = service.launcherFor {
    it.languageVersion.set(JavaLanguageVersion.of(<MAJOR_JDK_VERSION>)) // "8"
}
project.tasks.withType<UsesKotlinJavaToolchain>().configureEach {
    kotlinJavaToolchain.toolchain.use(customLauncher)
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
JavaToolchainService service = project.getExtensions().getByType(JavaToolchainService.class)
Provider<JavaLauncher> customLauncher = service.launcherFor {
    it.languageVersion.set(JavaLanguageVersion.of(<MAJOR_JDK_VERSION>)) // "8"
}
tasks.withType(UsesKotlinJavaToolchain::class).configureEach { task ->
    task.kotlinJavaToolchain.toolchain.use(customLauncher)
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

Or you can specify the path to your local JDK and replace the placeholder `<LOCAL_JDK_VERSION>` with this JDK version:

```kotlin
tasks.withType<UsesKotlinJavaToolchain>().configureEach {
    kotlinJavaToolchain.jdk.use(
        "/path/to/local/jdk", // Put a path to your JDK
        JavaVersion.<LOCAL_JDK_VERSION> // For example, JavaVersion.17
    )
}
```

### Associate compiler tasks

> You can _associate_ compilations by setting up such a relationship between them that one compilation will use the compiled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can _associate_ compilations by setting up such a relationship between them that one compilation uses the compiled
```

        <td>
            <p>Use for dependencies needed for the internal logic of a module.</p>
            <p>If a module is an endpoint application which is not published, use <code>implementation</code> dependencies instead
                of <code>api</code> dependencies.</p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>compileOnly</code></td>
        <td>Used for compilation of the current module and is not available at runtime nor during compilation of other modules.</td>
        <td>Use for APIs which have a third-party implementation available at runtime.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>runtimeOnly</code></td>
        <td>Available at runtime but is not visible during compilation of any module.</td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
</table>

### Dependency on the standard library

A dependency on the standard library (`stdlib`) is added automatically to each source set. The version
of the standard library used is the same as the version of the Kotlin Gradle plugin.

For platform-specific source sets, the corresponding platform-specific variant of the library is used, while a common standard

> library is added to the rest. The Kotlin Gradle plugin will select the appropriate JVM standard library depending on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
library is added to the rest. The Kotlin Gradle plugin selects the appropriate JVM standard library depending on
```

the `kotlinOptions.jvmTarget` [compiler option](gradle-compiler-options.md) of your Gradle build script.

If you declare a standard library dependency explicitly (for example, if you need a different version), the Kotlin Gradle
plugin won't override it or add a second standard library.

If you do not need a standard library at all, you can add the opt-out option to the `gradle.properties`:

```kotlin
kotlin.stdlib.default.dependency=false
```

### Set dependencies on test libraries

The [`kotlin.test`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/kotlin.test/) API is available for testing Kotlin projects on
all supported platforms.

> Add the dependency `kotlin-test` to the `commonTest` source set, and the Gradle plugin will infer the corresponding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the dependency `kotlin-test` to the `commonTest` source set, so that the Gradle plugin can infer the corresponding
```

Author: It's not the possibility, it will infer:)

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to avoid future tense 😄 What I mean in this sentence is that only by adding the dependency **can** the Gradle plugin infer. But maybe I misunderstand how this works?

Author: And what's the problem with the future tense? We have 740 occurrences of the word "will" in the project😅

Reviewer 2: In my last company, we largely followed Google's developer documentation style guide where the goal is to use the present tense as much as possible. Here is the relevant page: https://developers.google.com/style/tense But if that's not our style, let me know 😄

Reviewer: Yes, it's a rule to escape future tense in most of the companies (TBH, in every company I've worked for). Google developer docs style guide is a good reference with an explanation. 

Our docs were written for years with a lot of different people, so we don't have such rule, and it will take a while to rephrase all these lines in our docs. Let's keep it simple and omit such cases.

            dependencies {
                implementation(kotlin("test"))
            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
kotlin {
    jvm {
        testRuns["test"].executionTask.configure {
            useJUnitPlatform()
        }
    }
    sourceSets {
        commonTest {
            dependencies {
                implementation kotlin("test")
            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

The following example is for a JVM project:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
dependencies {
    testImplementation(kotlin("test"))
}

tasks {
    test {
        useTestNG()
    }
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
dependencies {
    testImplementation 'org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test'
}

test {
    useTestNG()
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

[Learn how to test code using JUnit on the JVM](jvm-test-using-junit.md).

If you need to use a different JVM test framework, disable automatic testing framework selection by
adding the line `kotlin.test.infer.jvm.variant=false` to the project's `gradle.properties` file.
After doing this, add the framework as a Gradle dependency.

> If you had used a variant of `kotlin("test")` in your build script explicitly and project build stopped working with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have used a variant of `kotlin("test")` in your build script explicitly and your project build stopped working with
```

            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
kotlin {
    sourceSets {
        jvmMain {
            dependencies {
                implementation 'org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core-jvm:%coroutinesVersion%'
            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

If you use a multiplatform library and need to depend on the shared code, set the dependency only once, in the shared
source set. Use the library's base artifact name, such as `kotlinx-coroutines-core` or `ktor-client-core`.

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
kotlin {
    sourceSets {
        val commonMain by getting {
            dependencies {
                implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core:%coroutinesVersion%")
            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
kotlin {
    sourceSets {
        commonMain {
            dependencies {
                implementation 'org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core:%coroutinesVersion%'
            }
        }
    }
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> ### Set dependencies at the top level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set dependencies at top level
```

> Alternatively, you can specify the dependencies at the top level, using the following pattern for the configuration names:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can specify the dependencies at top level, using the following pattern for the configuration names:
```

`<sourceSetName><DependencyType>`. This can be helpful for some Gradle built-in dependencies, like `gradleApi()`, `localGroovy()`,
or `gradleTestKit()`, which are not available in the source sets' dependency DSL.

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Kotlin" group-key="kotlin">

```kotlin
dependencies {
    "commonMainImplementation"("com.example:my-library:1.0")
}
```

</tab>
<tab title="Groovy" group-key="groovy">

```groovy
dependencies {
    commonMainImplementation 'com.example:my-library:1.0'
}
```

</tab>
</tabs>

## What's next?

Learn more about:

> * [Compiler options and ways of passing them](gradle-compiler-options.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Compiler options and how to pass them](gradle-compiler-options.md)
```

> * [Incremental compilation, caches support, build reports, and the Kotlin daemon](gradle-compilation-and-caches.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Incremental compilation, cache support, build reports, and the Kotlin daemon](gradle-compilation-and-caches.md)
```

> * [The Kotlin DSL](gradle-kotlin-dsl.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Kotlin DSL](gradle-kotlin-dsl.md)
```

> [//]: # (title: Configure a Gradle project)

Reviewer: Also about naming:
Maybe "gradle-configure-project"?
